GRAMMAR.md, before:

justfile grammar
================

Justfiles are processed by a mildly context-sensitive tokenizer
and a recursive descent parser. The grammar is mostly LL(1),
although an extra token of lookahead is used to distinguish between
export assignments and recipes with parameters.

tokens
------

```
BACKTICK   = `[^`\n\r]*`
COMMENT    = #([^!].*)?$
DEDENT     = emitted when indentation decreases
EOF        = emitted at the end of the file
INDENT     = emitted when indentation increases
LINE       = emitted before a recipe line
NAME       = [a-zA-Z_][a-zA-Z0-9_-]*
NEWLINE    = \n|\r\n
RAW_STRING = '[^'\r\n]*'
STRING     = "[^"]*" # also processes \n \r \t \" \\ escapes
TEXT       = recipe text, only matches in a recipe body
```

grammar syntax
--------------

```
|   alternation
()  grouping
_?  option (0 or 1 times)
_*  repetition (0 or more times)
_+  repetition (1 or more times)
```

grammar
-------

```
justfile      : item* EOF

item          : recipe
              | alias
              | assignment
              | export
              | eol

eol           : NEWLINE
              | COMMENT NEWLINE

alias         : 'alias' NAME ':=' NAME

assignment    : NAME ':=' expression eol

export        : 'export' assignment

expression    : value '+' expression
              | value

value         : NAME '(' sequence? ')'
              | STRING
              | RAW_STRING
              | BACKTICK
              | NAME
              | '(' expression ')'

sequence      : expression ',' sequence
              | expression ','?

recipe        : '@'? NAME parameter* ('+' parameter)? ':' dependencies? body?

parameter     : NAME
              | NAME '=' value

dependencies  : NAME+

body          : INDENT line+ DEDENT

line          : LINE (TEXT | interpolation)+ NEWLINE
              | NEWLINE

interpolation : '{{' expression '}}'
```

Commit message:

Gargantuan refactor (#522)
- Instead of changing the current directory with `env::set_current_dir`
  to be implicitly inherited by subprocesses, we now use
  `Command::current_dir` to set it explicitly. This feels much better,
  since we aren't dependent on the implicit state of the process's
  current directory.

- Subcommand execution is much improved.

- Added a ton of tests for config parsing, config execution, working
  dir, and search dir.

- Error messages are improved. Many more will be colored.

- The Config is now onwed, instead of borrowing from the arguments and
  the `clap::ArgMatches` object. This is a huge ergonomic improvement,
  especially in tests, and I don't think anyone will notice.

- `--edit` now uses `$VISUAL`, `$EDITOR`, or `vim`, in that order,
  matching git, which I think is what most people will expect.

- Added a cute `tmptree!{}` macro, for creating temporary directories
  populated with directories and files for tests.

- Admitted that grammer is LL(k) and I don't know what `k` is.

GRAMMAR.md, after:

justfile grammar
================

Justfiles are processed by a mildly context-sensitive tokenizer
and a recursive descent parser. The grammar is LL(k), for an
unknown but hopefully reasonable value of k.

tokens
------

```
BACKTICK   = `[^`\n\r]*`
COMMENT    = #([^!].*)?$
DEDENT     = emitted when indentation decreases
EOF        = emitted at the end of the file
INDENT     = emitted when indentation increases
LINE       = emitted before a recipe line
NAME       = [a-zA-Z_][a-zA-Z0-9_-]*
NEWLINE    = \n|\r\n
RAW_STRING = '[^'\r\n]*'
STRING     = "[^"]*" # also processes \n \r \t \" \\ escapes
TEXT       = recipe text, only matches in a recipe body
```

grammar syntax
--------------

```
|   alternation
()  grouping
_?  option (0 or 1 times)
_*  repetition (0 or more times)
_+  repetition (1 or more times)
```

grammar
-------

```
justfile      : item* EOF

item          : recipe
              | alias
              | assignment
              | export
              | eol

eol           : NEWLINE
              | COMMENT NEWLINE

alias         : 'alias' NAME ':=' NAME

assignment    : NAME ':=' expression eol

export        : 'export' assignment

expression    : value '+' expression
              | value

value         : NAME '(' sequence? ')'
              | STRING
              | RAW_STRING
              | BACKTICK
              | NAME
              | '(' expression ')'

sequence      : expression ',' sequence
              | expression ','?

recipe        : '@'? NAME parameter* ('+' parameter)? ':' dependencies? body?

parameter     : NAME
              | NAME '=' value

dependencies  : NAME+

body          : INDENT line+ DEDENT

line          : LINE (TEXT | interpolation)+ NEWLINE
              | NEWLINE

interpolation : '{{' expression '}}'
```
